From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes. Our weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists, Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
one 56. Recorded live Wednesday,
April 1st, 2009. Support for Hanselman it's
just provided by tolerant rad
controls, the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net
developers journal, the world's leading
that net developer magazine online
at www dot  dot
com. In this episode, Scott
talks with Ozlem con about
diversity and interaction from agile
development teams. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman, and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes.
We're doing an international show
today and we're on the
phone right now with Ozlem
Khan. He's in South Africa and
he's a software architect and
a coach he's got more
than 18 years of experience
in software. The reason that
I wanted to, as I'm
on the show is that
he's got a real passion
for creating real simple solutions
with complex problems. And he's
a like me as a
pragmatist. And he believes that
the only truthful implementation of
an architecture is the code
that gets executed. I always
like talking to pragmatists and
since Oslo is a guy
who spends a lot of
time in powering teams, I
wanted to have him on
the show and we're going
to talk about diversity in
small teams, and you'll be
able to read about more
about Ozlem on his blog
at Ozlem Khan. K H
a n.net. Thank you sir,
for taking the time. I
guess you're up pretty late
tonight. Yes. It's this funny
11:00 PM. And just flown back
to Cape town from Johannesburg
and it says visit to
be on your show. Well,
thanks. I'm glad that I
got you just walking off
the plane here. So we
want to talk about diversity
in small teams. Do you
do a lot of coaching
of teams? And since you're
a South African, I assume
those teams are fairly diverse.
Yes. I ended up coaching
team accidentally. Voter's been sitting
inviting foster with teams and
in South Africa we get pretty
diverse with 11 official languages
of which I only speak
to and can't name the
other nine. All of them,
it gets quite a complex.
And, and so the teams
that we have that are
emerging and I'm from very
various backgrounds. The originally I
think that before, before the
dismantlement of a pocket, we
had to be very homogenous
teams. We didn't have a
larger working black population and
the culture that's come with
the black population has changed
the dynamic for power teams.
And you're living in an
environment where it was not
long ago when things were
dramatically different than the States.
We can say that it's
been at least 40 years,
maybe 50, depending on when
you think things started to
turn around the, since things
were, were very bad, things
were significantly bad in your
lifetime. And even in the
lifetime of your, of your
teenage kids, I understand It
has been very, very recent.
And sometimes I think we
forget how recent it has
actually been. And so much
has happened since 1994, but
leading up to 1994, I
mean, I was in university
until 1991. So now someone
downloads released from prison in
1992. So my university years
and high school years was,
was really, really intense leave
focused at dismantling of Pontius.
It happened in 1992 and
it is such a, it's
such a distinct difference in
attitude. And in the way
we relive life for Africa
pre 1994 and post 1994,
the feeling of liberation in
1994 was, was probably the
most amazing experience I've ever
had in my life. And
I think to date, it
is the single moment in
my life where I actually
felt that there's a possibility
that us as a human
and actually shaped differences in
business, one is spent nine
hours standing in a queue
and in a not so
great part of Johannesburg in
1994. And it was a
single day of complete peace,
complete harmony amongst every single
person that was standing there.
It was amazing. And now
I think we facing different
challenges and different ways of,
of dealing with, with some
of the issues that we
have. And this is completely
different from what it was
before 1994 changed everyone's life.
Well now people when, when,
when, when people, and I
guess since I'm a white
man living in America, and
I tend to think when
I say people, I guess
I'm speaking of white folks
think of diversity. Sometimes they
think of nonwhite or they
think of mixed groups of
people typically focused around skin
color after 2001 in the
States, diversity became a little
bit more of a, of
an expansive term to mean
also people of various religions.
And I think that, you
know, certainly when people sit
down and think about what
diversity is, it's, it's everything
from, it could be hair,
color, and style. It could
be religion, it could be
disability. It could be anything.
Are people in South Africa still
focused on color? Or is
it more about culture or
is it more about, you
know, finances? It doesn't matter
what color you are. It
matters how much money you
have. It's changing Scott, I
think in South Africa, because we
have a previous dispensation where
it was low. It was,
it was, it is decreed
that people will live separately.
It was imposed upon you.
You can't shed that in
15 years and not think
about people in non racial
lines. I think it's an
easy stereotype that you converge
on when you describe people
and you categorize people, take
it on, on, on color
boundaries. But I think when
you scratch beneath the surface,
it is not so much
color. It is so much,
it is a lot more
about culture. And in South Africa
in the last five years,
we have a much greater
increase in an emerging black
middle class, which is really,
really important to Africa. And
so financial position and economic
status that introduces more diversity,
extremely conscious about gender equality.
So there's diversity in that
traditional cultures in South Africa, very
patriarchal in many parts of
the world. So gender politics
is really important. Political affiliation
is a really important characteristic
that distinguishes people from each
other, which political party you
associated with. You can't avoid
it in a country like
Sometimes from the point of
view of the ethnocentric West
as the, the white majority,
we here in America tend
to look at other countries
and say, it's just an
issue between two groups. We,
we would generalize and say,
well, the issue in South Africa
is between whites and blacks.
You know, the issues in
the Asian subcontinent or between
Indians and Pakistanis. And it
ignores the, the diversity of
the, of the group. Just
as you said, there's 11
official languages in South Africa. We
still think of it as
being a white and black
issue, but user are a
South African and your family
has been South African for
hundreds of years. And while
you are Brown, you're not
black. Does that change the
equation as you go about
your business as a, as
a developer in South Africa, That's
a, that's an interesting, that's
an interesting question. I have
to bring this back to
come back into context during
a Patek, you are black,
you are not white. That
was the distinction. You're not
white. You fought the same
struggle. You had one so-called
enemy and inverted common, you
know, so we fought against
the same oppressor, African African,
African Indian, South African African.
So I must make a
distinction, call it in South Africa.
It's not necessarily how you
look, Right? So when you
say when, when South Africans
say colored, they don't mean
any disrespect as it was
used in the States. They
mean mixed what we call
mixed people. So my son,
my sons are mixed. We
would call them in the
States or interracial or biracial.
They would be called colored
in South Africa without any meanness
meant in the statement. No,
none at all. I it's,
it's an, it's sort of
not an interracial marriage. So,
so that is what we
mean by colored. So, so
people that were not white,
we fought, we fought the
same struggle. We had the
same challenges. And when you
work in that type of
environment, you, you, you almost
invariably reported to, to a
white superior. And that was,
that was the context in
which you work. When you
come to post the pockets
of Africa, you're struggling to
find your own individual identity.
You could suddenly, there is
no single person that a
single category of people that,
that is pressing the Stripe,
you actually finding to find
your own identity. So even
amongst the African of Africans,
we have different cultures is,
is Plaza is Zulu, is
Shangaan Jonah. So it's each,
each one of those ethnic
grouping. That's starting to find
their own identity. There's a
South African Indian. You struggled
to find your own identity
as well, because my identity
is not India. It is
not that at all. I've
never been there. My great
grandfather or grandfather was from
there and, and completely different
for me. I have my
regions in South Africa. And so
working in South Africa as an
Indian, you look for your
own identity and you fighting
a different battle completely, Right?
You're no more attached to
India than I am to
Scotland of the 17 hundreds.
Exactly. I have, I have
no passion, but I'd love
to visit the place my
mother has, has, has knows
exactly the village we, her
father came from. She's been
there. I have no passion
to go there. I would
like to go there. It's
just interesting. The difference of
course, is that I can
look at you and make
an assumption, make a judgment
of where you're from. And
since I don't have a
kilt and red hair and
freckles people can't look at
me and your people are
from Scotland. So there are
all of these initial assumptions.
When showing shows up on
a team here in the
States, we work on very,
very diverse teams. And if
I join up with a
group of different software developers,
I may see two individuals
and not be able to
tell that one is Indian.
One is Pakistani, and maybe
they wouldn't be friends because
of some particular reason that
I can't understand as an
American, but I need to
think about that as a,
as a team manager. But
at the same time, I
don't want to focus on
it because it's not what
we're here for. We're here
to write software. When you
have all of those complexities,
how do you get coherence
in a, in a, in
a team when there's so
much underlying history? I was
touching that now, but I
think that not knowing I
can look at people of
Indian origin and I can
tell you that this business
was probably a Hindu and
this person was probably Campbell.
And that one is most
probably Pakistan, because I'm familiar
with the subtleties and differences,
the subtle differences between those
people. So it might just
be an exposure issue. I
might just not be familiar
with it. You know, There,
there are some groups that
you can't do that with,
but I hear what you're
saying. I mean, someone might
say all, you know, all
Asians look alike, but if
they spend time with them,
they may find it very
easy to tell what country
comes in. Someone comes from,
but in all of these
things, one makes an assumption
and one cannot be 100%.
Right. You know what I'm
saying? There was an interesting
experiment in the States here.
Recently when someone put out
resumes with traditionally white names
and then the identical resume
with traditionally African American names
names, that would be, you
know, like John Smith on one
side and, you know, Lavante
Jackson on the other side
and see if they would
make a difference just based
entirely on assumption around naming.
And this is a very
common thing in what's happening
in Iraq. Right now, people
can tell whether you're Sunni
or Shia based on your
last name. So this is
a worldwide thing. There's, there's,
there's being able to look
at you and tell by
your facial structure or assumed
by your facial structure by
your last name, by the
way, your accent is all
of these things causes initial
assumptions to be made, which
color no pun intended our
interactions with individuals. I hundred
percent agree with you is
that those early stereotypes that
we make coming back to
how we deal with this
in a, in a team
environment. So I I've been
through last year and the
year before that 2008, 2007,
I went through quite a
challenging experience working on a
project that was two years
long. And in that project,
I had most extreme conflict
between people that I've ever
had in my entire life
to, to the point where
I had people calling each
other, you know, leveraging really
strong statements, to the extent
of things like calling someone,
a white supremacy, okay. In
a work environment and an
open in an open meeting,
you know, really, really strong
statements that kept really, really
close to the mall. So,
mm right. And we had
a huge turnaround of staff.
And you can just imagine
people just breaking down the
spirit of people that we've
just been crushed. And, and
for the first time in
South Africa, working with South African,
there was not a single
person outside of South Africa in
there. First time I felt
as if I knew nobody,
I never understood involved, but
about the culture and about
what, what made them tick
in the project. And they
bothered me or not, you
know, and it was only
towards the end of that
project was the end of
my stay in that project
that I have a thinking
about what caused all of
this. And that's the thing
that came through my mind.
He just did not take
the time out to understand
each other. We just created
this tiny little universe. No,
it was isolated from the
rest of the world. We
came into this project and
we felt that, are we
going to do this whole
thing with the agile way
of doing it, that creates
a team value system and
everyone will adopt it. I
sat back and thought about
it later on. And it
is not so easy to
create a team values. Well,
how do you create a
value system? No, that's it
thinking about how, how we
bootstrap the team? And we
did the typical thing when
we're recruiting for this team.
We did it, we described
what we wanted out of
an individual. So, you know,
the typical stuff that Uber
geek, you know, must know
this language and must be
enthusiastic. You know, self-starter good
leader. And right at the
end, we always put down
something that says, you know,
must be a team, okay.
This individual and the asking
him to be part of
it, we should have had
to describe the team identity.
And if you're looking for
someone that'll fit this, he
says, when people believe, when
people enter into a new
in you, they have
personal identity to be ready.
They fit into that when
it's only, after a period
of time, if you start
living your personal characteristics, identity,
and self permeates, and we
never let happen, we just
did not let that happen.
So we had people with
strong political baggage, I'm using
the word banks really poorly,
but you know what I
mean is that they have
right. They had baggage of
some kind and they brought
it with them onto the
team on day one. Yeah.
And they have a lot
of history of tests with
them and it defined the
way they look forward in
life. And we didn't understand
that. I didn't understand it.
So we had the result
of the fact that I
just did not make the
time to understand each person
individually. And what made them
tick meant that we had
all of these power struggles
that they're going, these tiny
little posts going on. Each
person is just trying to
find a position in this
environment that was just exploded.
It just got magnified over
time. And the power struggles
became larger and larger and
larger, and you get sucked
into it. And, and I
started questioning, you know, what
does it mean to be
in an agile team? And
does it, does it make
any difference what, what we're
doing as a team, if
we just don't understand each
other, as people first and
foremost, writing software is an
extremely cerebral thing. At the
same time, it is a
purely social exercise, very, very
social in its structure. And
we just didn't take the
time off and a few
minutes, extra each morning just
to know each other. So
let me, let me dig
into that more, because recently
in the States, there's a,
there's a radio show called
talk of the nation. It's
kind of the American version
of world. Have your say.
And one of the discussions
was about a study that
came out recently that talked
about what they're calling colorblind
teams and culturally diverse or
culturally sensitive teams, basically, you
know, for many years in
the States, people have advocated
to being color blind. You
know, I see you as
an individual judge you on
the content of your character.
And we basically pretend that
we're all the same and
we really try to downplay
not necessarily ignore, but downplay
as much as we can
issues of, of color of
religious difference. Well, the other
perspective would sounds more like
what you're describing is to,
to recognize, to celebrate, to
discuss, to be open about
cultural differences. One of the
things I didn't like about
this particular show was that
they kept saying that and
referring to it in, in
vagueries. But what I want
to understand is if I'm
running an agile team, that's
very diverse and diverse doesn't
necessarily mean color. It just
means that we are all
different people. What can we
do? What concrete can I
bring to that, that team?
What techniques can I use
to change to, to frame
the discussion? Hmm. So I
think there's a few things
that we can try out.
I mean, one of the
things that I, I, I
like to try out is,
is to make some full
conversations, more meaningful, and I
go back to the way
teachings and then in different
coaches. So I come from,
I come from a Muslim
background and the way you
greet someone of Muslim background,
you say, , that's all
it is, you know, but
it's, it's, it's quite a
powerful statement. That's fundamental. I
mean, it's a throw away
statement like how you're doing,
but it is, it is
meaningful if you dig into
it. Yeah. And a Zulu
culture. Then when someone asks
you how you are, you
know, the literal translation is
that the response is not
the, I am fine because
the translation is I exist.
Right? Yeah. I am alive
still. I'm alive. I exist.
And, and, and it gets
quite colorful if the person
doesn't feel too good or
overlooked. So say something like
I'm filling my pants, you
know, I don't even have
time to eat, you know,
really working really hard. So
in, in conversation, I, I
would like people to explain
a little bit more about
how they really mean, because
the water cooler passing in
the corridor type of, type
of, Hey, Bob, how are
you? You know, I'm fine.
Just carry on walking. It's
a meaningless engagement. It's completely
meaningless. Right. But maybe not
to other people I say,
Yeah. So if people just
took the time out to
say a little bit more
about, yeah, this is how
it really feels, you know,
No, it's interesting. A, a
friend of ours who is
from Swazi land is now
living in France. He called
me a couple of hours
ago. And just to say,
hello, he was thinking about
us. And this always surprises
me, married to my wife
for 10 years. She's in
Baldwin. And we have all
of these international friends. And,
and this, this Swazi I
haven't talked to in two
years, how are you doing
first sentence, second sentence. How
are your parents? I, you
know, I, he met my
parents eight years ago, 10
years ago at our wedding,
but that's just such a,
that's such an African South
African thing to do. How
are you parents? How are
they keeping? I mean, he
remembers brothers and sisters in
laws and cousins. And how
are they? And, and, and
the, the, the, how are
you doing throwaway statements that,
that, that Americans typically use?
You know, how are you
doing when I don't really
want to know answer? If
the answer is not fine,
then, then just tell me,
you're fine. And we'll move
on. Is there's almost a
ceremonial reverence that happens in,
in African cultures around something
as simple as how are
you doing? He sincerely wants
to know how my parents
are doing You're right. It
is not uncommon it. And,
and it comes from the
fact that the atomic unit
in fact, is still the
family and not the individual.
So when you think about
someone in interact with someone,
you interact with them and
the entire family, I mean,
I listened to your show
where you did your interview
with a few people in
South Africa, including your wife. And
you spoke a little bit
about what the elders in
her family and the respect
that was offered to them.
It's the fact that the
family is still the unit
in society and not individual.
And that makes a big
difference. That is why we
still ask how is your
family, but it also creates
more meaningful understanding of the
person. If you're actually bringing
a part of the person's
life outside, outside the work
environment, into the work environment,
if you do, if you
do do something like that.
And when I think about
working in a team, it's
like working in a drum
and what is the ceiling?
It's the lid of the
drum. But when people come
into work environment and walk
into the morning, what can
every morning, you have no
idea whether they've had a
bad traffic day, a sick
child at home, or they're
worried about something else, and
that could affect the performance.
It could affect the behavior.
And we have no idea
about that. And so we
have to, we have to
bridge that in some way.
And I think that simple
conversations that are meaningful to
do that, it doesn't mean
that it's sit down and,
and, you know, 15 minutes,
just a few choice questions
that you can ask and
very politely, I think it
makes a huge difference. Hi,
it's Scott here from another
place in time. I hope
you're enjoying the show so
far. I apologize for interrupting
it, but I wanted to
let you know that assembling
a podcast like this every
week, isn't free. Certainly the
bandwidth bill crushes us every
month. So I want to
let you know that this
show is sponsored by Tellerik.
They make the show possible,
and it makes it pretty
cool products as well. For
example, if you're trying to
build a web 2.0 Ajax
application, trying to use the
web 1.0 components, it's kind
of difficult. You've got to
get the next gen stuff.
If you want to build
the next gen websites. And
that's exactly what the folks
at Telerx have got and
their new upcoming product, which
is code named rad controls.
Prometheus's big pack, a web
controls built entirely on top
of the Microsoft ASP net
Ajax stuff that you already
understand. It's going to give
you a lot of performance
interactivity on your next project.
They mirror the ASP net
Ajax API. So the development's
really straightforward client scripture's shared
loading time is pretty fast
set a couple of properties.
You can even bind to
web services for really efficient
operation. The new rad editor
for ASP and Ajax loads
up to four times faster
than before. And the rad
grid will do thousands of
records in milliseconds. But of
course, it's better to try
these things for yourself. So
you can visit  dot
com slash ASP, net Ajax,
and download a trial. Thanks
a lot for listening, and
we'll get right back to
the show. So bringing that
back to the concrete, I'm
hearing you say that that
kind of paraphrasing and adding
a little color of my
own, that, you know, we
are such a logical beings.
This is such a hyper
logical, almost dysfunctional thing of
making the making of software.
It, you know, we are
asked as humans to almost,
you know, to think like
machines. I can see where
if I was on a
diverse team that had a
large number of people that
valued family, and I was
the, Hey, how's it going?
All right, let's get this.
Let's get to work individual
that they could start to
distrust me feel that I
didn't value the things that
they valued. They might not
be able to put their
finger on it and say,
it's because Scott's not asking
me how my parents are.
It's not it's, you know,
they may just have a
sense of, I don't think
he cares. Is that a
fair thing to say? It's
a very real possibility because
you just didn't make the
time, take the time to,
to, to understand how I
feel very real possibility. And
it could manifest beyond just
finding out how the person
is. The fact is that
if you don't take the
time out to understand the
individual's value system and the,
and the value system is,
comes from the value system
of the family, of the
culture over decades and generations.
So what are the things
in South Africa, in a previous
company that it looks at
director used to call it
a one to 10, one
to 10 is driving him
crazy because punctuality was not
that important. So if you
set a meeting for 10:00 AM
and people walked in 15
minutes past, it was actually
okay, because walking to the
meeting in the car, though,
in the passage, I met
someone and decided to have
a conversation and then come
in, you know, so it
manifests itself in so many
different ways that we have
to become aware of these
tiny little things and define
our own value system. Now,
when you, it's funny that
you get that you brought
this up because I posted
about this and I called
it African time. And there's
been a number of different
names for this thing. And
I posted about this and
I got some very pointed
responses on my, on my
blog about, you know, who
well, that's you, who are,
who are you to impose
your value system and insist
that people are on time?
Or how can you make
a judgment about a whole
group of people implying that
they're, they're not on time.
So I have a, a
South African to, to prove
that these things do exist,
that, that it's not making
a value judgment, that a
person is a bad person
to say they are showing
up late. They simply value
different things. They're not meaning
to disrespect me. Like if
my wife shows up late
for an appointment that we
set, it's not that she
doesn't value the appointment or
the time or my time
it's that something happened that
she valued more or differently.
And she made that judgment
call. And while people will,
people in the States might
rush away from a chance
meeting with a friend in
order to make it to
a meeting on time, someone
that values something differently like
my wife or yourself perhaps
might let that chance meeting
with a friend linger and
be 15, 20 minutes late.
And if the people at
the meeting value that same
thing also, then no one
would be insulted. Or if
it feel at all that
it was an inappropriate thing
to do. It can't necessarily
be inappropriate. Just, just falling
on what you're saying is
that, and the concept is
we're born to, you know,
I think is, is extremely
powerful for diverse team, because
it's about, it's about defining
so simple philosophy. You mentioned
it in your, in your
interview with your wife, that
is about, it says that
you are who you are
through other people, you know,
people are people through other
people. So I call it
a one to 10 because
people often get delayed, not
as it's sitting at their
desk, you know, hacking away
at some code because they,
it is, it is important
to them to have a
two minute engagement with someone
that they did not see
it the day before they
get to the meeting. And
that is important today in
value. That that is an
extremely important thing that punches
it is. So you can't
say that, you know, coming
late to the meeting was
disrespectful to the meeting and
the people that it's just
that this person at a
mall had executed a different
value at this made a
baby. So, you know, and
I think about the hardwood
experience I had with that
particular project and all the
conflicts that we had. And
I think that if we
had just dropped back to
some of the concepts philosophies,
or from Bluetooth would have
helped. So we've, and we've,
and we've had leadership in
the country and has been
trying to reinforce this. So
when Nelson Mandela, he talks
about it, as simply as
when you do something in
your community, are you doing
it for yourself, or are
you thinking about how it's
going to benefit the next
person in your community or
your entire community? I think
from a perspective writing software,
the action that you do
have you thought about whether
that action is going to
benefit the rest of the
team often we don't know,
and this might be my
experience, you know? And so
let's take a trivial example.
Someone come with broken, you
know, broken bones. Have you
thought about it, about how
it affects the rest of
the team? And if you
wrote this line of code,
have you thought about how
it fits? If you communicate
in a particular way, have
you thought about hot fix?
And it's just about thinking
beyond yourself, that's what it
is. Yeah. So now some
people, some people might say
though, that this is a
very kind of Eastern, you
know, humanist philosophy. That's very
different. You know, it's very
intangible. You know, this is
a, it's just a philosophy
and your one could, could
push back a little bit
and say what you're telling
me to, you know, think
about how this line of
code affects my coworkers. There
was actually, there's an interesting
book by a Harvard sociologist
that is making the rounds
in the U S right
now. And it's, it's called
the no asshole rule. And
it is a, you would,
you would dismiss one would
dismiss it based entirely on
its title. They would say,
Oh, well, this is a
very course, a very course
term. We don't want to
be any part of that,
but this is an actual,
you know, Harvard, PhD is
put, thought into why he
picked such a course word
and the whole book could
be summed up into that
Zulu saying, well, , you
know, a person is a
person that other people don't
be an asshole and you
you'll see things like that
around the web for years,
that that just do, we
have to be so intense,
so angry. So whatever in
everything that we do as,
as developers, it is what
we're describing and getting involved
and getting in, getting along
rather on, on diverse teams,
as simple as just try
not to be a jerk
and think about what you're
doing. Is it that easy?
You could break, you can
break it down to, to
B to be something as,
as simple as that, but
the impact it has is
profound because how you, how
you, how do you execute,
not being a joke is
what is important to saying
that not being a jerk
is a simple statement. How
do you not be a
jerk? It was really important.
And it's really hard thing
to do, defining a jerk.
You know, it varies between
people, you know, some people
might find you completely obnoxious
and others might find you
extremely likable. And it's just
because the criteria they use
to judge you a completely
different. And that gets into
the cultural context of, you
know, someone might say, well,
I really like how efficient
Scott is. He doesn't mince
words. He gets right down
to business. Well, someone who
values something differently might say,
wow, he's so cold. He
has no interest in our
daily life. And all he
thinks about his work and
that could elicit completely opposite
results. How do you, how
do you reconcile that? Does
that mean I need to
change? We all need to
change our behavior or does
it just really mean that
we all, as a team
need to temper our behavior
and understand that maybe Scott
acts that way because he
is here. I am talking
about myself in the third
person. You know, maybe this
individual talks this way because
that's what they value. And
I will not be offended
as I ordinarily would be.
It's just a matter of
relaxing. I think when we
impose individual value systems, we
really impose it on others.
We started getting conflict. If
these people don't, don't tolerate
in positions, having the will
of someone else imposed upon
them. And the way you,
you way to get harmony
is when you, when you
do make compromises and the
acts of compromise that brings
about that harmony, and you
can't have compromise unless you
understand the position that the
person is coming from, you
understand your own mission. You
have some reconciliation with that,
and don't take it back
to listen in South Africa. Again,
I spoke about Nelson Mandela
and how he describes the
Archbishop Desmond Tutu would describe
the bull too, as a
way of respecting someone regardless
of, of, of what they
have done in the past.
And here's a, here's a,
here's a, you know, an
amazing individual who, who chaired
the truth and reconciliation commission
in South Africa, which was, I
personally believe was, was the
instrumental that prevented us from
going into civil war. Like
the rest of Africa. People
still think that, that the
truth and reconciliation, the way
that they ran the truth
and reconciliation commission is the
model for doing such things
and needs to be done
in other places. Yes. So
we had, we had, it
was such a simple concept,
but it came back to
the same philosophy that we
had closure. And we had
understanding people could see who
did what wrong to their
family in the past. And
it's just understanding what happened
that people were able to
reconcile and move on. And
I think it's the same
thing. When you have conflicts
in teams, you just need
to actually just sit down
and just hear the other
person out and try to
understand a little bit more
about the motor that came
from it. And a lot
of the times we live
with the blame culture. You
know, we always want to,
you always want to blame
someone else. A lot of
the times the issue is
it's just that someone made
a mistake. It's just simple
as that. That's just an
honest mistake is not being
blown out of proportion. You
know, we have the blame
culture, which, which detracts from
accepting responsibility. And when we
go into the blame mode,
we don't think back to
our South and say, Oh,
what am I doing wrong?
Probably someone else's thing that
comes back to the way
business Tutu describes the wound
and how it helps with
radiation, the society. It's not
different. We see it. I
mean, it's not a, it's
not an African thing. Masa,
Gandy basically said the same
thing. You got gotta, you
gotta measure your worth by
what you've done to help
the next person and the
same ideas. And I think
in software teams, we don't
do enough of that. We
just sit down. And when
we think about, you know,
the technical challenges that you're
facing, yes, we have to
sit down and be social
before we can solve problems
together. Hmm. Yeah. It really
is a matter of being
present and being conscious. And,
you know, so much of,
of interaction with people is,
is without formal thought, it's,
it's just easier to let
the interaction happen. And in
those cases, you fall back
on all of the things
that define you as an
individual. Are you gonna respond
to someone consciously or are
you going to let whatever
pops out of your mouth
happen? And I'm hearing you
say, you know, code consciously,
BA BA member of the
team that is present and
aware, it doesn't necessarily mean
tiptoe around differences with people,
but approach them with an
open mind and an understanding
that they are not necessarily,
or almost assuredly coming at
it at the same direction
that you are Tiptoeing around.
People becomes the extreme opposite,
where you actually walking on
these eggshells and it's being,
I mean, it's about political
correctness, which is just as
meaningless because you don't have
to be offensive to people
if you're trying to understand
their position, it's, it's the
same, it's the same example
as coming late for a
meeting. You know, it's a
similar thing when, when you
talk to someone and say,
but I didn't understand that,
you know, Zulu people or,
or, you know, Latinos or
whatever it is, did things
like that. You may be
doing a, you know, a
generalization or stereotyping, but it's
not necessarily that you mean
it in an offensive way.
We don't have to necessarily
go to the other extreme
of being extremely politically, correct.
Just to get, just to
avoid the issues. You don't
want to avoid issues. You
want deal with the issue.
So There's the problem of
political correctness, a big thing
in South Africa. Yes. Very much.
So everything is a big,
big in South Africa. I'm just
saying that sometimes as a
white guy, I feel like
maybe it's like maybe white
people have the, the market
cornered on being extra. Careful
not to offend anyone. It's
such a, it's such a,
it's such an odd thing
because sometimes I think people
are, I don't know whether
people are being politically correct.
Right. Or they're being euphemistic.
Yeah. That's a very good
question. I mean, I, I
usually pre start sentences with
you. I hope I'm not
offending you, but you know,
I mean, there's, there's various
levels of offensive, right. I
mean, as, as a, as
a parent of two young
black men, there's the, there's
the, Hey, let me touch
their hair without asking level
of offensiveness, which is kind
of a lowercase O but
then there's kind of the
more, like, what are you,
what are they, which is,
you know, getting to full
on kind of, Hey, w
w what are you trying
to say? There are ways
to approach these differences without
making people feel bad about
them. Sometimes I think that
that political correctness should be
reserved for bureaucrats and for
legalees and getting it right
in government communications and communication.
And when it starts creeping
into, you know, social conversation,
I wonder whether it's used
as, as, just as a
euphemism for, you know, for
being scared of offending people.
So you tone it down
and maybe we shouldn't turn
it down. No one wants
to offend someone. I hope
unless you were going out,
looking for a fight. The
goal here is not to
offend anyone. I think there's
that. I mean, I wanna,
I wanna talk radios here.
There's a nine o'clock show
and the guy is coming.
And he, he has some
really extreme people, you know,
people that are extremely tolerant
to taking a non politically
correct politically incorrect statements against
him and, and just dealing
with this and other people
can take a very, very
soft issue and really, really
hard done by. And so
that's what I think we
have. We have to some
extent learned how to deal
with, with, with what could
be considered really offensive to
other people we've learned to
deal with it in some
ways it's okay to be
very forthright about certain issues.
I don't think you can't,
I don't think you can
be subtle about something in
South Africa. Well, and in any,
anywhere in the world, I
have found almost always that
if one is earnest in
their, in the, in their
quest for understanding, right, if
I'm, if I'm here just
to do a better job
and just understand things better
so that we can be
a team, then no matter
how I phrase it, I
can usually not offend somebody.
What I found is where
it goes wrong is when,
when in that discussion that
you having to gain that
understanding when you have this
violence slip over from understanding
in general, and people start
becoming very personal, they start
judging the person and not
judging the situation. So we
start having this personal conflict,
and that becomes a that's
getting nasty. Well, I think
that that's very good advice.
The idea that whatever this
is, it's not about you
personally. There's another important thing.
They always say, check your
ego at the door. Yeah,
it really is. It really
is. And the, the other
day I watched on, on,
on one of the Ted
talk is a UCLA legendary
basketball coach. I forget his
name. It was really great
talk. And all of the
things he was talking about,
how we define success and
a few other things, and
his life philosophies and stuff.
One thing that he said
that really hits me was
it don't, don't try to
be better than what else
all you gotta do is
learn from someone else. Don't
be better than someone else
just learn from someone else.
If you don't have to
be better than someone else,
you just have to learn
from someone else, which may
be the thing that, you
know, there is no such
thing as a top dog
in a team. There isn't
someone who, who is above
anyone else. It's just sitting
and working with people and
learning from each other, as
opposed to trying to find
which strata in the team
you actually fit in and
give love that love great
thing is Trotter and slotting
people in, you know, it
comes down to the job
description, you know, junior developer,
senior analyst, you know, test
as compared to develop a
unit test. Oh my goodness.
Yeah. Yeah. That's definitely not
agile. Not it's kind of
against the agile style. And,
and I, I, I definitely
have that. I like to,
I mean, even though we
all, I mean at one
person might have 20 years
experience and another person might
have a, you know, a
year's experience. I've always kind
of liked the two things
that I think Jeff Atwood
mentioned that one was, you
know, have a really strong
opinion, but have a weakly
held, you know, fight and
no one to stop and
say, Oh, Oh, I guess
you are right. Then move
on. And then the other
one was, we are all
amateurs. You know, about how
much experience you've got. We're
really all amateurs. This is
a very young discipline. And
we're all in this together.
You know, Intel actually has
a, a statement in working
in teams that they call
disagree and commit. And that's
really worked well for me
in working in diverse teams
to say, let's have a
fight. Here's the, here are
the bounds of the fight.
You know, here's the cage
match we're going to get
in here. It's not personal.
Let's fight it out, no
yelling, no personal attacks. And
when we're done, though, we
will all just, you know,
we'll disagree if you didn't
like the idea, but we
will commit to it. And
we don't want to hear,
I told you so or
arguments afterwards. And if the
entire team in their list
of team values can agree
that we will disagree. And
we will commit though and
put all of our weight
behind a particular solution that
works great. As a, as
a, as a team value
in a diverse team, That's
similar to one of the
tier two contradictions. There's a
great book called extreme theater
that has been reading. And
one of the contradictions into
that, they have a strong
sense of, of structure and,
and, and an order in
the company hierarchy, which everybody
honors in respect and, and
both through the post, through
the normal channels to get
things done. But at the
same time, they really encourage
people to be extremely vocal,
regardless of what position they
hold in the company. So
it, it, it doesn't seem
like it can work together,
but the fact that they
allow people to be extremely
vocal means that they do
get to hear about things
that concern people, which would
ordinarily have been blocked by
the strong bureaucratic structures that
exist. So it's an interesting
way in which they try
to manage feedback. Yeah. I
think that that's a very
good value. I think Microsoft
does that sometimes in the
sense of I can speak
up. I basically know that
you can speak up and
know when to shut up
or kind of too good
values for, you know, two
good skills for anyone to
develop. I don't think that
if you are, if you're
in a culture that allows
that, that allows you to
speak to the president of
the company or whoever, or
your manager or your manager's
manager's manager, if it's an
appropriate bit of feedback and
communication, and it should be
in, and it's welcomed, you
should use that. And then
if anybody, at the same
time, you should know when
to stop. You should say,
okay, well, I've said my
thing. I'm not going to
beat this horse anymore. I
have been heard. And then
now I'm going to disagree
and commit. I've. I've learned
that in the last six
months from my fender Navien
colleagues, I'm new, I'm sitting
in South Africa and the rest
of my colleagues are in
Sweden. And I learned very
quickly that they listen a
lot more than I do.
They really practice the art
of lifting. That is very
a Scandinavian thing. No. And
a silence at the end
of a telephone line for
a few seconds. And then
you get a response or
maybe just, maybe even the
next day, you get a
response. And I constantly teased
it, you know, about, about
how polite they're, it comes
across to being extremely polite.
I said to anything when
I say that, so, you
know, if they have to
go back into war with
Denmark, then was probably invite
them over for a cup
of tea, talk about, instead
of budding down the oldest
on the bridge. And, you
know, and I said, I've
collected anymore, but it's, but
it's, it's a really a
great value to, to hold.
You know, it's exactly the
same thing you're saying, be
quiet, listen, before you respond.
And, and so some of
the teams that I find
here in South Africa is that
we fought too eager sometimes
to just get our point
across. And we interrupt people
a lot when they speak
That that's, that's interesting. So
I think it was my
wife that told me this,
actually, I should say, publicly
on my podcast at all
good things flow from my
wife. She said, are you
listening? Or are you waiting
to speak? And when we're
arguing, I find that I
am sometimes not listening, but
rather waiting for my turn
to throw words at her.
So I think that's a
very interesting, I think I've
just now understood what she
meant by that. Well, I'm
bad about you. Good. Well,
I think this is probably
a good place to end
our discussion. And I thank
you so much for taking
the time out of your,
your busy schedule. And I
know I've kept you up
late in South Africa. I'm sure
our listeners do appreciate it.
Well, I am really privileged
to be speaking to you,
and I hope that what
is spoken about will help
someone else and their teams
and help us all to
be a little bit better
species going forward. I really
do hope so. Definitely will
buy you A lunch and
a coffee. And the next
time that I go at
Gaia, come back to a
Saturday. You got to do
that. You got to do
that. Were you in Cape
town in December? And I
missed it. I don't know
how that happened. Scandalous. I
wouldn't have, I wouldn't have
made it anyway. I had
a very long you're you're
working far too hard. Well,
I had a horrible 2007,
2008. I was spending weekends
in Cape town with my
family and living in Victoria.
Oh my goodness. Yeah. So
I think, I think I'm
going to the website called
flight all the flights, my
soon as I've had, Hmm.
You're racking up the miles,
but you're helping people. And
I think that we appreciate
it and folks can check
out your blog@ozlemcon.net. And I
will put all those links
up on the show notes.
And this has been another
episode of Hansel minutes, and
I'll see you again next
week.